boards/xtensa/esp32s3_devkitm/doc/index.rst, before:

.. _esp32s3_devkitm:

ESP32S3-DevKitM
###############

Overview
********

The ESP32-S3-DevKitM is an entry-level development board equipped with either ESP32-S3-MINI-1
or ESP32-S3-MINI-1U, a module named for its small size. This board integrates complete Wi-Fi
and Bluetooth Low Energy functions. For more information, check `ESP32-S3 DevKitM`_

Hardware
********

ESP32-S3 is a low-power MCU-based system on a chip (SoC) with integrated 2.4 GHz Wi-Fi
and Bluetooth® Low Energy (Bluetooth LE). It consists of high-performance dual-core microprocessor
(Xtensa® 32-bit LX7), a low power coprocessor, a Wi-Fi baseband, a Bluetooth LE baseband,
RF module, and numerous peripherals.

ESP32-S3 DevKitM includes the following features:

- Dual core 32-bit Xtensa Microprocessor (Tensilica LX7), running up to 240MHz
- Additional vector instructions support for AI acceleration
- 512KB of SRAM
- 384KB of ROM
- Wi-Fi 802.11b/g/n
- Bluetooth LE 5.0 with long-range support and up to 2Mbps data rate

Digital interfaces:

- 45 programmable GPIOs
- 4x SPI
- 1x LCD interface (8-bit ~16-bit parallel RGB, I8080 and MOTO6800), supporting conversion between RGB565, YUV422, YUV420 and YUV411
- 1x DVP 8-bit ~16-bit camera interface
- 3x UART
- 2x I2C
- 2x I2S
- 1x RMT (TX/RX)
- 1x pulse counter
- LED PWM controller, up to 8 channels
- 1x full-speed USB OTG
- 1x USB Serial/JTAG controller
- 2x MCPWM
- 1x SDIO host controller with 2 slots
- General DMA controller (GDMA), with 5 transmit channels and 5 receive channels
- 1x TWAI® controller, compatible with ISO 11898-1 (CAN Specification 2.0)
- Addressable RGB LED, driven by GPIO48.

Analog interfaces:

- 2x 12-bit SAR ADCs, up to 20 channels
- 1x temperature sensor
- 14x touch sensing IOs

Timers:

- 4x 54-bit general-purpose timers
- 1x 52-bit system timer
- 3x watchdog timers

Low Power:

- Power Management Unit with five power modes
- Ultra-Low-Power (ULP) coprocessors: ULP-RISC-V and ULP-FSM

Security:

- Secure boot
- Flash encryption
- 4-Kbit OTP, up to 1792 bits for users
- Cryptographic hardware acceleration: (AES-128/256, Hash, RSA, RNG, HMAC, Digital signature)

For more information, check the datasheet at `ESP32-S3 Datasheet`_.

Supported Features
==================

Current Zephyr's ESP32-S3-DevKitM board supports the following features:

+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| Interface  | Controller | Driver/Component                    |
+============+============+=====================================+
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| UART       | on-chip    | serial port                         |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| GPIO       | on-chip    | gpio                                |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| PINMUX     | on-chip    | pinmux                              |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| USB-JTAG   | on-chip    | hardware interface                  |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| SPI Master | on-chip    | spi                                 |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| Timers     | on-chip    | counter                             |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| Watchdog   | on-chip    | watchdog                            |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| TRNG       | on-chip    | entropy                             |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| LEDC       | on-chip    | pwm                                 |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| MCPWM      | on-chip    | pwm                                 |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| PCNT       | on-chip    | qdec                                |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+

Prerequisites
-------------

Espressif HAL requires WiFi and Bluetooth binary blobs in order work. Run the command
below to retrieve those files.

.. code-block:: console

   west blobs fetch hal_espressif

.. note::

   It is recommended running the command above after :file:`west update`.

Building & Flashing
-------------------

Build and flash applications as usual (see :ref:`build_an_application` and
:ref:`application_run` for more details).

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: esp32s3_devkitm
   :goals: build

The usual ``flash`` target will work with the ``esp32s3_devkitm`` board
configuration. Here is an example for the :ref:`hello_world`
application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: esp32s3_devkitm
   :goals: flash

Open the serial monitor using the following command:

.. code-block:: shell

   west espressif monitor

After the board has automatically reset and booted, you should see the following
message in the monitor:

.. code-block:: console

   ***** Booting Zephyr OS vx.x.x-xxx-gxxxxxxxxxxxx *****
   Hello World! esp32s3_devkitm

Debugging
---------

As with much custom hardware, the ESP32 modules require patches to
OpenOCD that are not upstreamed yet. Espressif maintains their own fork of
the project. The custom OpenOCD can be obtained at `OpenOCD ESP32`_

The Zephyr SDK uses a bundled version of OpenOCD by default. You can overwrite that behavior by adding the
``-DOPENOCD=<path/to/bin/openocd> -DOPENOCD_DEFAULT_PATH=<path/to/openocd/share/openocd/scripts>``
parameter when building.

Here is an example for building the :ref:`hello_world` application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: esp32s3_devkitm
   :goals: build flash
   :gen-args: -DOPENOCD=<path/to/bin/openocd> -DOPENOCD_DEFAULT_PATH=<path/to/openocd/share/openocd/scripts>

You can debug an application in the usual way. Here is an example for the :ref:`hello_world` application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: esp32s3_devkitm
   :goals: debug

References
**********

.. _`ESP32-S3 DevKitM`: https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32s3/hw-reference/esp32s3/user-guide-devkitm-1.html
.. _`ESP32-S3 Datasheet`: https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-s3-mini-1_mini-1u_datasheet_en.pdf
.. _`ESP32 Technical Reference Manual`: https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-s3_technical_reference_manual_en.pdf
.. _`JTAG debugging for ESP32-S3`: https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32s3/api-guides/jtag-debugging/
.. _`OpenOCD ESP32`: https://github.com/espressif/openocd-esp32/releases

Commit message:

boards: esp32xx: doc: update documentation on espressif Soc
Update documentation related to debugging and supported features.

Signed-off-by: Lucas Tamborrino <lucas.tamborrino@espressif.com>

boards/xtensa/esp32s3_devkitm/doc/index.rst, after:

.. _esp32s3_devkitm:

ESP32S3-DevKitM
###############

Overview
********

The ESP32-S3-DevKitM is an entry-level development board equipped with either ESP32-S3-MINI-1
or ESP32-S3-MINI-1U, a module named for its small size. This board integrates complete Wi-Fi
and Bluetooth Low Energy functions. For more information, check `ESP32-S3 DevKitM`_

Hardware
********

ESP32-S3 is a low-power MCU-based system on a chip (SoC) with integrated 2.4 GHz Wi-Fi
and Bluetooth® Low Energy (Bluetooth LE). It consists of high-performance dual-core microprocessor
(Xtensa® 32-bit LX7), a low power coprocessor, a Wi-Fi baseband, a Bluetooth LE baseband,
RF module, and numerous peripherals.

ESP32-S3 DevKitM includes the following features:

- Dual core 32-bit Xtensa Microprocessor (Tensilica LX7), running up to 240MHz
- Additional vector instructions support for AI acceleration
- 512KB of SRAM
- 384KB of ROM
- Wi-Fi 802.11b/g/n
- Bluetooth LE 5.0 with long-range support and up to 2Mbps data rate

Digital interfaces:

- 45 programmable GPIOs
- 4x SPI
- 1x LCD interface (8-bit ~16-bit parallel RGB, I8080 and MOTO6800), supporting conversion between RGB565, YUV422, YUV420 and YUV411
- 1x DVP 8-bit ~16-bit camera interface
- 3x UART
- 2x I2C
- 2x I2S
- 1x RMT (TX/RX)
- 1x pulse counter
- LED PWM controller, up to 8 channels
- 1x full-speed USB OTG
- 1x USB Serial/JTAG controller
- 2x MCPWM
- 1x SDIO host controller with 2 slots
- General DMA controller (GDMA), with 5 transmit channels and 5 receive channels
- 1x TWAI® controller, compatible with ISO 11898-1 (CAN Specification 2.0)
- Addressable RGB LED, driven by GPIO48.

Analog interfaces:

- 2x 12-bit SAR ADCs, up to 20 channels
- 1x temperature sensor
- 14x touch sensing IOs

Timers:

- 4x 54-bit general-purpose timers
- 1x 52-bit system timer
- 3x watchdog timers

Low Power:

- Power Management Unit with five power modes
- Ultra-Low-Power (ULP) coprocessors: ULP-RISC-V and ULP-FSM

Security:

- Secure boot
- Flash encryption
- 4-Kbit OTP, up to 1792 bits for users
- Cryptographic hardware acceleration: (AES-128/256, Hash, RSA, RNG, HMAC, Digital signature)

For more information, check the datasheet at `ESP32-S3 Datasheet`_.

Supported Features
==================

Current Zephyr's ESP32-S3-DevKitM board supports the following features:

+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| Interface  | Controller | Driver/Component                    |
+============+============+=====================================+
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| UART       | on-chip    | serial port                         |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| GPIO       | on-chip    | gpio                                |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| PINMUX     | on-chip    | pinmux                              |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| USB-JTAG   | on-chip    | hardware interface                  |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| SPI Master | on-chip    | spi                                 |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| Timers     | on-chip    | counter                             |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| Watchdog   | on-chip    | watchdog                            |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| TRNG       | on-chip    | entropy                             |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| LEDC       | on-chip    | pwm                                 |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| MCPWM      | on-chip    | pwm                                 |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| PCNT       | on-chip    | qdec                                |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+

Prerequisites
-------------

Espressif HAL requires WiFi and Bluetooth binary blobs in order work. Run the command
below to retrieve those files.

.. code-block:: console

   west blobs fetch hal_espressif

.. note::

   It is recommended running the command above after :file:`west update`.

Building & Flashing
-------------------

Build and flash applications as usual (see :ref:`build_an_application` and
:ref:`application_run` for more details).

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: esp32s3_devkitm
   :goals: build

The usual ``flash`` target will work with the ``esp32s3_devkitm`` board
configuration. Here is an example for the :ref:`hello_world`
application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: esp32s3_devkitm
   :goals: flash

Open the serial monitor using the following command:

.. code-block:: shell

   west espressif monitor

After the board has automatically reset and booted, you should see the following
message in the monitor:

.. code-block:: console

   ***** Booting Zephyr OS vx.x.x-xxx-gxxxxxxxxxxxx *****
   Hello World! esp32s3_devkitm

Debugging
---------

ESP32-S3 support on OpenOCD is available upstream as of version 0.12.0.
Download and install OpenOCD from `OpenOCD`_.

ESP32-S3 has a built-in JTAG circuitry and can be debugged without any additional chip. Only an USB cable connected to the D+/D- pins is necessary.

Further documentation can be obtained from the SoC vendor in `JTAG debugging
for ESP32-S3`_.

Here is an example for building the :ref:`hello_world` application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: esp32s3_devkitm
   :goals: build flash

You can debug an application in the usual way. Here is an example for the :ref:`hello_world` application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: esp32s3_devkitm
   :goals: debug

.. _`JTAG debugging for ESP32-S3`: https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32s3/api-guides/jtag-debugging/
.. _`OpenOCD`: https://github.com/openocd-org/openocd
.. _`ESP32-S3 DevKitM`: https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32s3/hw-reference/esp32s3/user-guide-devkitm-1.html

References
**********

.. _ESP32-S3 DevKitM User Guide: https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32s3/hw-reference/esp32s3/user-guide-devkitm-1.html
.. _ESP32-S3 Datasheet: https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-s3-mini-1_mini-1u_datasheet_en.pdf
.. _ESP32 Technical Reference Manual: https://www.espressif.com/sites/default/files/documentation/esp32-s3_technical_reference_manual_en.pdf
