doc/hardware/peripherals/regulators.rst, before:

.. _regulator_api:

Regulators
##########

This subsystem provides control of voltage and current regulators.  A
common example is a GPIO that controls a transistor that supplies
current to a device that is not always needed.

Conceptually regulators have two modes: off and on.  A transition
between modes may involve a time delay, so operations on regulators are
inherently asynchronous.  To maximize flexibility the
:ref:`resource_mgmt_onoff` infrastructure is used in the generic API for
the regulator subsystem.  Nodes with a devicetree compatible of
``regulator-fixed`` are the most common flexible regulators.

The ``vin-supply`` devicetree property is used to identify the
regulator(s) that a devicetree node directly depends on.  Within the
driver for the node the regulator API is used to issue requests for
power when the device is to be active, and release the power request
when the device shuts down.

The simplest case where a regulator is needed is one where there is only
one client.  For those situations the cost of using even the optimized
synchronous regulator device infrastructure is not justified, and the
``supply-gpios`` devicetree property should be used.  There is no device
interface to these regulators as they are entirely controlled within the
driver for the corresponding node, e.g. a sensor.

.. _regulator_api_reference:

API Reference
**************

.. doxygengroup:: regulator_interface

Commit message:

doc: regulators: improve introduction
Improve and update driver class introduction. Removed some outdated
information about on/off, mention PMICs, generalize *-supply properties,
etc.

Signed-off-by: Gerard Marull-Paretas <gerard.marull@nordicsemi.no>

doc/hardware/peripherals/regulators.rst, after:

.. _regulator_api:

Regulators
##########

This subsystem provides control of voltage and current regulators. A common
example is a GPIO that controls a transistor that supplies current to a device
that is not always needed. Another example is a PMIC, typically a much more
complex device.

The ``*-supply`` devicetree properties are used to identify the regulator(s)
that a devicetree node directly depends on. Within the driver for the node the
regulator API is used to issue requests for power when the device is to be
active, and release the power request when the device shuts down.

The simplest case where a regulator is needed is one where there is only one
client. For those situations the cost of using the regulator device
infrastructure is not justified, and ``*-gpios`` devicetree properties should be
used. There is no device interface to these regulators as they are entirely
controlled within the driver for the corresponding node, e.g. a sensor.

.. _regulator_api_reference:

API Reference
**************

.. doxygengroup:: regulator_interface
