boards/arm/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit/doc/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit.rst, before:

.. _olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit:

Olimex LoRa STM32WL DevKit
##########################

Overview
********

LoRaWAN development kit based on Olimex BB-STM32WL module using the
STM32WLE5CCU6 MCU.

.. figure:: olimex-stm32wl-devkit.jpg
     :align: center
     :alt: Olimex LoRa STM32WL DevKit

     Olimex LoRa STM32WL DevKit (credit: OLIMEX)

Hardware
********

The board has below hardware features:

- BB-STM32WL, 256KB Flash, 64KB RAM with external antenna
- Lithium battery connector 3V (does not include battery)
- UEXT connector for external sensors
- BME280 temperature, humidity, pressure sensor
- LDR resistor for lighting measurement
- IIS2MDCTR 3-axis magnetometer for smart parking
- GPIO connector for prototyping
- Low power design
- 1 User LED
- 1 user, 1 boot, and 1 reset push-button
- 32.768 kHz LSE crystal oscillator

More information about the board and the module can be found here:

- `LoRa-STM32WL-DevKit Repository`_
- `LoRa-STM32WL-DevKit page on OLIMEX website`_
- `BB-STM32WL Module website`_
- `STM32WLE5CC reference manual`_
- `STM32WLE5CC on www.st.com`_

Supported Features
==================

The Zephyr Olimex LoRa STM32WL Dev Kit configuration supports the following
hardware features:

+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| Interface | Controller | Driver/Component                    |
+===========+============+=====================================+
| ADC       | on-chip    | adc                                 |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| AES       | on-chip    | crypto                              |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| COUNTER   | on-chip    | rtc                                 |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| CLOCK     | on-chip    | reset and clock control             |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| FLASH     | on-chip    | flash                               |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| GPIO      | on-chip    | gpio                                |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| I2C       | on-chip    | i2c                                 |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| MPU       | on-chip    | arch/arm                            |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| NVIC      | on-chip    | arch/arm                            |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| PINMUX    | on-chip    | pinmux                              |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| RADIO     | on-chip    | LoRa                                |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| SPI       | on-chip    | spi                                 |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| UART      | on-chip    | serial port-polling;                |
|           |            | serial port-interrupt               |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| WATCHDOG  | on-chip    | independent watchdog                |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+

Other hardware features are not yet supported on this Zephyr port.

The default configuration can be found in the defconfig and dts files:

- :zephyr_file:`boards/arm/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit_defconfig`
- :zephyr_file:`boards/arm/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit.dts`

Programming and Debugging
*************************

Applications for the ``olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit`` board configuration can be built the
usual way (see :ref:`build_an_application`).

The board contains an on-board debug probe which implements the CMSIS-DAP
interface.

It can also be debugged and flashed with an external debug probe connected
to the SWD pins.

The built-in debug probe works with pyOCD, but requires installing an additional
pack to support the STM32WL:

.. code-block:: console

   $ pyocd pack --update
   $ pyocd pack --install stm32wl

Flashing an application
=======================

Connect the board to your host computer and build and flash an application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit
   :goals: build flash

Run a serial terminal to connect with your board. By default, ``usart1`` is
accessible via the the built-in USB to UART converter.

.. code-block:: console

   $ picocom --baud 115200 /dev/ttyACM0

Debugging
=========

You can debug an application in the usual way.  Here is an example for the
:ref:`blinky-sample` application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/basic/blinky
   :board: olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit
   :maybe-skip-config:
   :goals: debug

.. _LoRa-STM32WL-DevKit Repository:
   https://github.com/OLIMEX/LoRa-STM32WL-DevKIT

.. _LoRa-STM32WL-DevKit page on OLIMEX website:
   https://www.olimex.com/Products/IoT/LoRa/LoRa-STM32WL-DevKit/open-source-hardware

.. _BB-STM32WL Module website:
   https://www.olimex.com/Products/IoT/LoRa/BB-STM32WL/

.. _STM32WLE5CC on www.st.com:
   https://www.st.com/en/microcontrollers-microprocessors/stm32wle5cc.html

.. _STM32WLE5CC datasheet:
   https://www.st.com/resource/en/datasheet/stm32wle5cc.pdf

.. _STM32WLE5CC reference manual:
   https://www.st.com/resource/en/reference_manual/dm00530369-stm32wlex-advanced-armbased-32bit-mcus-with-subghz-radio-solution-stmicroelectronics.pdf

Commit message:

boards: olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit: Support newer board revisions
Add configuration and DT overlays for new devkit revisions C and D.

This enables identical behavior to earlier revisions by powering the VDDIO
pins on the UEXT1 connector and CON1 header via the new FET2 regulator.
In these new revisons this regulator is also user-togglable.

Update documentation build/flash/debug steps.

Signed-off-by: Kenneth J. Miller <ken@miller.ec>

boards/arm/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit/doc/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit.rst, after:

.. _olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit:

Olimex LoRa STM32WL DevKit
##########################

Overview
********

LoRaWAN development kit based on Olimex BB-STM32WL module using the
STM32WLE5CCU6 MCU.

.. figure:: olimex-stm32wl-devkit.jpg
     :align: center
     :alt: Olimex LoRa STM32WL DevKit

     Olimex LoRa STM32WL DevKit (credit: OLIMEX)

Hardware
********

The board has below hardware features:

- BB-STM32WL, 256KB Flash, 64KB RAM with external antenna
- Lithium battery connector 3V (does not include battery)
- UEXT connector for external sensors
- BME280 temperature, humidity, pressure sensor
- LDR resistor for lighting measurement
- IIS2MDCTR 3-axis magnetometer for smart parking
- GPIO connector for prototyping
- Low power design
- 1 User LED
- 1 user, 1 boot, and 1 reset push-button
- 32.768 kHz LSE crystal oscillator

More information about the board and the module can be found here:

- `LoRa-STM32WL-DevKit Repository`_
- `LoRa-STM32WL-DevKit page on OLIMEX website`_
- `BB-STM32WL Module website`_
- `STM32WLE5CC reference manual`_
- `STM32WLE5CC on www.st.com`_

Supported Features
==================

The Zephyr Olimex LoRa STM32WL Dev Kit configuration supports the following
hardware features:

+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| Interface | Controller | Driver/Component                    |
+===========+============+=====================================+
| ADC       | on-chip    | adc                                 |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| AES       | on-chip    | crypto                              |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| COUNTER   | on-chip    | rtc                                 |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| CLOCK     | on-chip    | reset and clock control             |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| FLASH     | on-chip    | flash                               |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| GPIO      | on-chip    | gpio                                |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| I2C       | on-chip    | i2c                                 |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| MPU       | on-chip    | arch/arm                            |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| NVIC      | on-chip    | arch/arm                            |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| PINMUX    | on-chip    | pinmux                              |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| RADIO     | on-chip    | LoRa                                |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| SPI       | on-chip    | spi                                 |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| UART      | on-chip    | serial port-polling;                |
|           |            | serial port-interrupt               |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| WATCHDOG  | on-chip    | independent watchdog                |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+

Other hardware features are not yet supported on this Zephyr port.

The default configuration can be found in the defconfig and dts files:

- :zephyr_file:`boards/arm/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit_defconfig`
- :zephyr_file:`boards/arm/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit/olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit.dts`

Programming and Debugging
*************************

Applications for the ``olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit`` board configuration can be built the
usual way (see :ref:`build_an_application`).

The board contains an on-board debug probe which implements the CMSIS-DAP
interface.

It can also be debugged and flashed with an external debug probe connected
to the SWD pins.

The built-in debug probe works with pyOCD, but requires installing an additional
pack to support the STM32WL:

.. code-block:: console

   $ pyocd pack --update
   $ pyocd pack --install stm32wl

Flashing an application
=======================

Connect the board to your host computer and build and flash an application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit
   :goals: build flash

If you're using devkit revision C or higher, you'll need to specify the
appropriate revision letter to enable the VDDIO supply to the UEXT1 connector and
CON1 pin header.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit@D
   :goals: build flash

Run a serial terminal to connect with your board. By default, ``usart1`` is
accessible via the the built-in USB to UART converter.

.. code-block:: console

   $ picocom --baud 115200 /dev/ttyACM0

Debugging
=========

You can debug an application in the usual way.  Here is an example for the
:ref:`blinky-sample` application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/basic/blinky
   :board: olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit
   :maybe-skip-config:
   :goals: debug

On board revisions C or newer:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/basic/blinky
   :board: olimex_lora_stm32wl_devkit@D
   :maybe-skip-config:
   :goals: debug

.. _LoRa-STM32WL-DevKit Repository:
   https://github.com/OLIMEX/LoRa-STM32WL-DevKIT

.. _LoRa-STM32WL-DevKit page on OLIMEX website:
   https://www.olimex.com/Products/IoT/LoRa/LoRa-STM32WL-DevKit/open-source-hardware

.. _BB-STM32WL Module website:
   https://www.olimex.com/Products/IoT/LoRa/BB-STM32WL/

.. _STM32WLE5CC on www.st.com:
   https://www.st.com/en/microcontrollers-microprocessors/stm32wle5cc.html

.. _STM32WLE5CC datasheet:
   https://www.st.com/resource/en/datasheet/stm32wle5cc.pdf

.. _STM32WLE5CC reference manual:
   https://www.st.com/resource/en/reference_manual/dm00530369-stm32wlex-advanced-armbased-32bit-mcus-with-subghz-radio-solution-stmicroelectronics.pdf
