.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/bug_report.md, before:

---
name: Bug report
about: Create a report to help us improve Zephyr
title: ''
labels: bug
assignees: ''

---

**Describe the bug**
A clear and concise description of what the bug is.
(Note that [Github Discussions](https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/discussions) are available to first verify that the issue
is a genuine Zephyr bug and not a consequence of Zephyr services misuse.)

Please also mention any information which could help others to understand
the problem you're facing:
 - What target platform are you using?
 - What have you tried to diagnose or workaround this issue?
 - Is this a regression? If yes, have you been able to "git bisect" it to a
   specific commit?
 - ...

**To Reproduce**
Steps to reproduce the behavior:
1. mkdir build; cd build
2. cmake -DBOARD=board\_xyz
3. make
4. See error

**Expected behavior**
A clear and concise description of what you expected to happen.

**Impact**
What impact does this issue have on your progress (e.g., annoyance, showstopper)

**Logs and console output**
If applicable, add console logs or other types of debug information
e.g Wireshark capture or Logic analyzer capture (upload in zip archive).
copy-and-paste text and put a code fence (\`\`\`) before and after, to help
explain the issue. (if unable to obtain text log, add a screenshot)

**Environment (please complete the following information):**
 - OS: (e.g. Linux, MacOS, Windows)
 - Toolchain (e.g Zephyr SDK, ...)
 - Commit SHA or Version used

**Additional context**
Add any other context that could be relevant to your issue, such as pin setting,
target configuration, ...

Commit message:

templates: bug: add a note about project forks
Add a note in the issue template mentioning that bugs in project forks
should be reported on the fork issue tracker.

Signed-off-by: Fabio Baltieri <fabiobaltieri@google.com>

.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/bug_report.md, after:

---
name: Bug report
about: Create a report to help us improve Zephyr
title: ''
labels: bug
assignees: ''

---

**Notes (delete this)**
Github Discussions (https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/discussions)
are available to first verify that the issue is a genuine Zephyr bug and not a
consequence of Zephyr services misuse.

This issue list is only for bugs in the main Zephyr code base
(https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/). If the bug is for a project
fork (such as NCS) specific feature, please open an issue in the fork project
instead.

**Describe the bug**
A clear and concise description of what the bug is.

Please also mention any information which could help others to understand
the problem you're facing:
 - What target platform are you using?
 - What have you tried to diagnose or workaround this issue?
 - Is this a regression? If yes, have you been able to "git bisect" it to a
   specific commit?
 - ...

**To Reproduce**
Steps to reproduce the behavior:
1. mkdir build; cd build
2. cmake -DBOARD=board\_xyz
3. make
4. See error

**Expected behavior**
A clear and concise description of what you expected to happen.

**Impact**
What impact does this issue have on your progress (e.g., annoyance, showstopper)

**Logs and console output**
If applicable, add console logs or other types of debug information
e.g Wireshark capture or Logic analyzer capture (upload in zip archive).
copy-and-paste text and put a code fence (\`\`\`) before and after, to help
explain the issue. (if unable to obtain text log, add a screenshot)

**Environment (please complete the following information):**
 - OS: (e.g. Linux, MacOS, Windows)
 - Toolchain (e.g Zephyr SDK, ...)
 - Commit SHA or Version used

**Additional context**
Add any other context that could be relevant to your issue, such as pin setting,
target configuration, ...
