doc/develop/languages/c/index.rst, before:

.. _language_c:

C Language Support
##################

C is a general-purpose low-level programming language that is widely used for
writing code for embedded systems.

Zephyr is primarily written in C and natively supports applications written in
the C language. All Zephyr API functions and macros are implemented in C and
available as part of the C header files under the :file:`include` directory, so
writing Zephyr applications in C gives the developers access to the most
features.

.. _c_standards:

Language Standards
******************

Zephyr does not target a specific version of the C standards; however, the
Zephyr codebase makes extensive use of the features newly introduced in the
1999 release of the ISO C standard (ISO/IEC 9899:1999, hereinafter referred to
as C99) such as those listed below, effectively requiring the use of a compiler
toolchain that supports the C99 standard and above:

* inline functions
* standard boolean types (``bool`` in ``<stdbool.h>``)
* fixed-width integer types (``[u]intN_t`` in ``<stdint.h>``)
* designated initializers
* variadic macros
* ``restrict`` qualification

Some Zephyr components make use of the features newly introduced in the 2011
release of the ISO C standard (ISO/IEC 9899:2011, hereinafter referred to as
C11) such as the type-generic expressions using the ``_Generic`` keyword. For
example, the :c:func:`cbprintf` component, used as the default formatted output
processor for Zephyr, makes use of the C11 type-generic expressions, and this
effectively requires most Zephyr applications to be compiled using a compiler
toolchain that supports the C11 standard and above.

In summary, it is recommended to use a compiler toolchain that supports at
least the C11 standard for developing with Zephyr. It is, however, important to
note that some optional Zephyr components and external modules may make use of
the C language features that have been introduced in more recent versions of
the standards, in which case it will be necessary to use a more up-to-date
compiler toolchain that supports such standards.

.. _c_library:

Standard Library
****************

The `C Standard Library`_ is an integral part of any C program, and Zephyr
provides the support for a number of different C libraries for the applications
to choose from, depending on the compiler toolchain being used to build the
application.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   minimal_libc.rst
   newlib.rst
   picolibc.rst

.. _`C Standard Library`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_standard_library

.. _c_library_formatted_output:

Formatted Output
****************

C defines standard formatted output functions such as ``printf`` and
``sprintf`` and these functions are implemented by the C standard
libraries.

Each C standard library has its own set of requirements and configurations for
selecting the formatted output modes and capabilities. Refer to each C standard
library documentation for more details.

.. _c_library_dynamic_mem:

Dynamic Memory Management
*************************

C defines a standard dynamic memory management interface (for example,
:c:func:`malloc` and :c:func:`free`) and these functions are implemented by the
C standard libraries.

While the details of the dynamic memory management implementation varies across
different C standard libraries, all supported libraries must conform to the
following conventions. Every supported C standard library shall:

* manage its own memory heap either internally or by invoking the hook
  functions (for example, :c:func:`sbrk`) implemented in :file:`libc-hooks.c`.

* maintain the architecture- and memory region-specific alignment requirements
  for the memory blocks allocated by the standard dynamic memory allocation
  interface (for example, :c:func:`malloc`).

* allocate memory blocks inside the ``z_malloc_partition`` memory partition
  when userspace is enabled. See :ref:`memory_domain_predefined_partitions`.

For more details regarding the C standard library-specific memory management
implementation, refer to each C standard library documentation.

.. note::
   Native Zephyr applications should use the :ref:`memory management API
   <memory_management_api>` supported by the Zephyr kernel such as
   :c:func:`k_malloc` in order to take advantage of the advanced features
   that they offer.

   C standard dynamic memory management interface functions such as
   :c:func:`malloc` should be used only by the portable applications and
   libraries that target multiple operating systems.

Commit message:

doc: Switch main return type from void to int.
As both C and C++ standards require applications running under an OS to
return 'int', adapt that for Zephyr to align with those standard. This also
eliminates errors when building with clang when not using -ffreestanding,
and reduces the need for compiler flags to silence warnings for both clang
and gcc.

Signed-off-by: Keith Packard <keithp@keithp.com>

doc/develop/languages/c/index.rst, after:

.. _language_c:

C Language Support
##################

C is a general-purpose low-level programming language that is widely used for
writing code for embedded systems.

Zephyr is primarily written in C and natively supports applications written in
the C language. All Zephyr API functions and macros are implemented in C and
available as part of the C header files under the :file:`include` directory, so
writing Zephyr applications in C gives the developers access to the most
features.

The ``main()`` function must have the return type of ``int`` as Zephyr
applications run in a "hosted" environment as defined by the C
standard. Applications must return zero (0) from main. All non-zero return
values are reserved.

.. _c_standards:

Language Standards
******************

Zephyr does not target a specific version of the C standards; however, the
Zephyr codebase makes extensive use of the features newly introduced in the
1999 release of the ISO C standard (ISO/IEC 9899:1999, hereinafter referred to
as C99) such as those listed below, effectively requiring the use of a compiler
toolchain that supports the C99 standard and above:

* inline functions
* standard boolean types (``bool`` in ``<stdbool.h>``)
* fixed-width integer types (``[u]intN_t`` in ``<stdint.h>``)
* designated initializers
* variadic macros
* ``restrict`` qualification

Some Zephyr components make use of the features newly introduced in the 2011
release of the ISO C standard (ISO/IEC 9899:2011, hereinafter referred to as
C11) such as the type-generic expressions using the ``_Generic`` keyword. For
example, the :c:func:`cbprintf` component, used as the default formatted output
processor for Zephyr, makes use of the C11 type-generic expressions, and this
effectively requires most Zephyr applications to be compiled using a compiler
toolchain that supports the C11 standard and above.

In summary, it is recommended to use a compiler toolchain that supports at
least the C11 standard for developing with Zephyr. It is, however, important to
note that some optional Zephyr components and external modules may make use of
the C language features that have been introduced in more recent versions of
the standards, in which case it will be necessary to use a more up-to-date
compiler toolchain that supports such standards.

.. _c_library:

Standard Library
****************

The `C Standard Library`_ is an integral part of any C program, and Zephyr
provides the support for a number of different C libraries for the applications
to choose from, depending on the compiler toolchain being used to build the
application.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   minimal_libc.rst
   newlib.rst
   picolibc.rst

.. _`C Standard Library`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_standard_library

.. _c_library_formatted_output:

Formatted Output
****************

C defines standard formatted output functions such as ``printf`` and
``sprintf`` and these functions are implemented by the C standard
libraries.

Each C standard library has its own set of requirements and configurations for
selecting the formatted output modes and capabilities. Refer to each C standard
library documentation for more details.

.. _c_library_dynamic_mem:

Dynamic Memory Management
*************************

C defines a standard dynamic memory management interface (for example,
:c:func:`malloc` and :c:func:`free`) and these functions are implemented by the
C standard libraries.

While the details of the dynamic memory management implementation varies across
different C standard libraries, all supported libraries must conform to the
following conventions. Every supported C standard library shall:

* manage its own memory heap either internally or by invoking the hook
  functions (for example, :c:func:`sbrk`) implemented in :file:`libc-hooks.c`.

* maintain the architecture- and memory region-specific alignment requirements
  for the memory blocks allocated by the standard dynamic memory allocation
  interface (for example, :c:func:`malloc`).

* allocate memory blocks inside the ``z_malloc_partition`` memory partition
  when userspace is enabled. See :ref:`memory_domain_predefined_partitions`.

For more details regarding the C standard library-specific memory management
implementation, refer to each C standard library documentation.

.. note::
   Native Zephyr applications should use the :ref:`memory management API
   <memory_management_api>` supported by the Zephyr kernel such as
   :c:func:`k_malloc` in order to take advantage of the advanced features
   that they offer.

   C standard dynamic memory management interface functions such as
   :c:func:`malloc` should be used only by the portable applications and
   libraries that target multiple operating systems.
