doc/develop/west/sign.rst, before:

.. _west-sign:

Signing Binaries
################

The ``west sign`` :ref:`extension <west-extensions>` command can be used to
sign a Zephyr application binary for consumption by a bootloader using an
external tool. Run ``west sign -h`` for command line help.

MCUboot / imgtool
*****************

The Zephyr build system has special support for signing binaries for use with
the `MCUboot`_ bootloader using the `imgtool`_ program provided by its
developers. You can both build and sign this type of application binary in one
step by setting some Kconfig options. If you do, ``west flash`` will use the
signed binaries.

If you use this feature, you don't need to run ``west sign`` yourself; the
build system will do it for you.

Here is an example workflow, which builds and flashes MCUboot, as well as the
:ref:`hello_world` application for chain-loading by MCUboot. Run these commands
from the :file:`zephyrproject` workspace you created in the
:ref:`getting_started`.

.. code-block:: console

   west build -b YOUR_BOARD bootloader/mcuboot/boot/zephyr -d build-mcuboot
   west build -b YOUR_BOARD zephyr/samples/hello_world -d build-hello-signed -- \
        -DCONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT=y \
        -DCONFIG_MCUBOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE=\"bootloader/mcuboot/root-rsa-2048.pem\"

   west flash -d build-mcuboot
   west flash -d build-hello-signed

Notes on the above commands:

- ``YOUR_BOARD`` should be changed to match your board
- The ``CONFIG_MCUBOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE`` value is the insecure default
  provided and used by by MCUboot for development and testing
- You can change the ``hello_world`` application directory to any other
  application that can be loaded by MCUboot, such as the :ref:`smp_svr_sample`

For more information on these and other related configuration options, see:

- :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT`: build the application for loading by
  MCUboot
- :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE`: the key file to use with ``west
  sign``. If you have your own key, change this appropriately
- :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_EXTRA_IMGTOOL_ARGS`: optional additional command line
  arguments for ``imgtool``
- :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_GENERATE_CONFIRMED_IMAGE`: also generate a confirmed
  image, which may be more useful for flashing in production environments than
  the OTA-able default image
- On Windows, if you get "Access denied" issues, the recommended fix is
  to run ``pip3 install imgtool``, then retry with a pristine build directory.

If your ``west flash`` :ref:`runner <west-runner>` uses an image format
supported by imgtool, you should see something like this on your device's
serial console when you run ``west flash -d build-mcuboot``:

.. code-block:: none

   *** Booting Zephyr OS build zephyr-v2.3.0-2310-gcebac69c8ae1  ***
   [00:00:00.004,669] <inf> mcuboot: Starting bootloader
   [00:00:00.011,169] <inf> mcuboot: Primary image: magic=unset, swap_type=0x1, copy_done=0x3, image_ok=0x3
   [00:00:00.021,636] <inf> mcuboot: Boot source: none
   [00:00:00.027,313] <wrn> mcuboot: Failed reading image headers; Image=0
   [00:00:00.035,064] <err> mcuboot: Unable to find bootable image

Then, you should see something like this when you run ``west flash -d
build-hello-signed``:

.. code-block:: none

   *** Booting Zephyr OS build zephyr-v2.3.0-2310-gcebac69c8ae1  ***
   [00:00:00.004,669] <inf> mcuboot: Starting bootloader
   [00:00:00.011,169] <inf> mcuboot: Primary image: magic=unset, swap_type=0x1, copy_done=0x3, image_ok=0x3
   [00:00:00.021,636] <inf> mcuboot: Boot source: none
   [00:00:00.027,374] <inf> mcuboot: Swap type: none
   [00:00:00.115,142] <inf> mcuboot: Bootloader chainload address offset: 0xc000
   [00:00:00.123,168] <inf> mcuboot: Jumping to the first image slot
   *** Booting Zephyr OS build zephyr-v2.3.0-2310-gcebac69c8ae1  ***
   Hello World! nrf52840dk_nrf52840

Whether ``west flash`` supports this feature depends on your runner. The
``nrfjprog`` and ``pyocd`` runners work with the above flow. If your runner
does not support this flow and you would like it to, please send a patch or
file an issue for adding support.

.. _MCUboot:
   https://mcuboot.com/

.. _imgtool:
   https://pypi.org/project/imgtool/

Commit message:

doc: develop: west: sign: Add details on extending signing
Adds details on how to extend/replace the CMake files used for
west sign operations.

Signed-off-by: Jamie McCrae <jamie.mccrae@nordicsemi.no>

doc/develop/west/sign.rst, after:

.. _west-sign:

Signing Binaries
################

The ``west sign`` :ref:`extension <west-extensions>` command can be used to
sign a Zephyr application binary for consumption by a bootloader using an
external tool. Run ``west sign -h`` for command line help.

MCUboot / imgtool
*****************

The Zephyr build system has special support for signing binaries for use with
the `MCUboot`_ bootloader using the `imgtool`_ program provided by its
developers. You can both build and sign this type of application binary in one
step by setting some Kconfig options. If you do, ``west flash`` will use the
signed binaries.

If you use this feature, you don't need to run ``west sign`` yourself; the
build system will do it for you.

Here is an example workflow, which builds and flashes MCUboot, as well as the
:ref:`hello_world` application for chain-loading by MCUboot. Run these commands
from the :file:`zephyrproject` workspace you created in the
:ref:`getting_started`.

.. code-block:: console

   west build -b YOUR_BOARD bootloader/mcuboot/boot/zephyr -d build-mcuboot
   west build -b YOUR_BOARD zephyr/samples/hello_world -d build-hello-signed -- \
        -DCONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT=y \
        -DCONFIG_MCUBOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE=\"bootloader/mcuboot/root-rsa-2048.pem\"

   west flash -d build-mcuboot
   west flash -d build-hello-signed

Notes on the above commands:

- ``YOUR_BOARD`` should be changed to match your board
- The ``CONFIG_MCUBOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE`` value is the insecure default
  provided and used by by MCUboot for development and testing
- You can change the ``hello_world`` application directory to any other
  application that can be loaded by MCUboot, such as the :ref:`smp_svr_sample`

For more information on these and other related configuration options, see:

- :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT`: build the application for loading by
  MCUboot
- :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_SIGNATURE_KEY_FILE`: the key file to use with ``west
  sign``. If you have your own key, change this appropriately
- :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_EXTRA_IMGTOOL_ARGS`: optional additional command line
  arguments for ``imgtool``
- :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MCUBOOT_GENERATE_CONFIRMED_IMAGE`: also generate a confirmed
  image, which may be more useful for flashing in production environments than
  the OTA-able default image
- On Windows, if you get "Access denied" issues, the recommended fix is
  to run ``pip3 install imgtool``, then retry with a pristine build directory.

If your ``west flash`` :ref:`runner <west-runner>` uses an image format
supported by imgtool, you should see something like this on your device's
serial console when you run ``west flash -d build-mcuboot``:

.. code-block:: none

   *** Booting Zephyr OS build zephyr-v2.3.0-2310-gcebac69c8ae1  ***
   [00:00:00.004,669] <inf> mcuboot: Starting bootloader
   [00:00:00.011,169] <inf> mcuboot: Primary image: magic=unset, swap_type=0x1, copy_done=0x3, image_ok=0x3
   [00:00:00.021,636] <inf> mcuboot: Boot source: none
   [00:00:00.027,313] <wrn> mcuboot: Failed reading image headers; Image=0
   [00:00:00.035,064] <err> mcuboot: Unable to find bootable image

Then, you should see something like this when you run ``west flash -d
build-hello-signed``:

.. code-block:: none

   *** Booting Zephyr OS build zephyr-v2.3.0-2310-gcebac69c8ae1  ***
   [00:00:00.004,669] <inf> mcuboot: Starting bootloader
   [00:00:00.011,169] <inf> mcuboot: Primary image: magic=unset, swap_type=0x1, copy_done=0x3, image_ok=0x3
   [00:00:00.021,636] <inf> mcuboot: Boot source: none
   [00:00:00.027,374] <inf> mcuboot: Swap type: none
   [00:00:00.115,142] <inf> mcuboot: Bootloader chainload address offset: 0xc000
   [00:00:00.123,168] <inf> mcuboot: Jumping to the first image slot
   *** Booting Zephyr OS build zephyr-v2.3.0-2310-gcebac69c8ae1  ***
   Hello World! nrf52840dk_nrf52840

Whether ``west flash`` supports this feature depends on your runner. The
``nrfjprog`` and ``pyocd`` runners work with the above flow. If your runner
does not support this flow and you would like it to, please send a patch or
file an issue for adding support.

.. _west-extending-signing:

Extending signing externally
****************************

The signing script used when running ``west flash`` can be extended or replaced
to change features or introduce different signing mechanisms. By default with
MCUboot enabled, signing is setup by the :file:`cmake/mcuboot.cmake` file in
Zephyr which adds extra post build commands for generating the signed images.
The file used for signing can be replaced by adjusting the ``SIGNING_SCRIPT``
property on the `zephyr_property_target`, ideally done by a module using:

.. code-block:: cmake

   if(CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT)
     set_target_properties(zephyr_property_target PROPERTIES SIGNING_SCRIPT ${CMAKE_CURRENT_LIST_DIR}/custom_signing.cmake)
   endif()

This will include the custom signing CMake file instead of the default Zephyr
one when projects are built with MCUboot signing support enabled. The base
Zephyr MCUboot signing file can be used as a reference for creating a new
signing system or extending the default behaviour.

.. _MCUboot:
   https://mcuboot.com/

.. _imgtool:
   https://pypi.org/project/imgtool/
